Understanding Impact of Product Quality Perceptions on Smartphone
Purchase Behaviors
Business Question
Quality is one of the key parameters for building a competitive advantage in the 
marketplace. Perceived quality’s relevance has been confirmed through PIMS-and other 
studies, which have supported its role as a significant driver of a firm’s profitability and 
of successful corporate performance. Studies have shown that changes in quality 
perceptions were positively related to stock returns over and above current-term 
accounting measures (Mizik and Jacobson 2004). Therefore, perceived quality as a 
long-term driver of business performance represents a very relevant piece of 
information for both managers and investors alike.
While theoretical conceptualizations of product quality unanimously stress its 
multidimensional nature, still today no product quality scale, consistent with these multidimensional conceptualizations, exists. Therefore product management of a major 
smartphone producer set-up a project to develop a framework to measure product 
quality of smartphones as experienced by customers, “Customers’ Evaluated Product 
Quality (CEPQ)”, in terms of its constituent dimensions. Another reason to try to develop 
a better understanding of customers’ product quality perceptions, were the 
disappointing results of customer satisfaction studies. 
The satisfaction surveys conducted by the company have over the years shown only 
marginal differentiation across competitors and worse were not able to predict 
repurchase behaviour of customers. That is customers who indicated high satisfaction 
rates with their current smartphone were not necessarily repurchasing the same
smartphone brand, when they replaced their current smartphone. Most importantly 
product management wants to get a deeper understanding about which quality 
dimensions significantly explain key outcome variables such as willingness to pay 
premium (WTPP) and repurchase intentions (RI). Another stakeholder interested in the 
results of this project is the operations management department of the company. In the 
past total quality management programs, had difficulties in proving their efficacy. Indeed 
across industries the frequent failure of TQM programs even from companies, who 
have been recipients of quality awards, have raised general concerns about their 
efficacy. One of the likely reasons for the disappointing results of many TQM-programs 
which has been proposed by quality experts is that “firms do not measure quality 
effectively” (Sebastianelli and Tamimi 2002, p. 442). Therefore the operations 
management department hopes that the project provides them with a criterion variable 
to assess success or failure of their quality improvement initiatives.
In a first-step of this research project the project team conducted a literature research 
on product quality. Many authors have stressed the difficulty of defining and measuring 
product quality. Pirsig (1974, p. 185,213) captured this difficulty of defining the concept 
of quality among researchers in his famous quote: "Quality is neither mind nor matter, 
but a third entity independent of two....even though quality can not be defined, you know 
what it is”. A key reason for the difficulty in defining quality is caused by the different 
perspectives on quality which are rooted in different disciplines e.g. according to
the user-based approach of marketing quality is the extent to which a product or service 
meets or exceeds customer expectations. In contrast, the manufacturing-based 
approach with roots in operations and productions management defines quality as a 
conformance to design standards and specifications (Garvin 1988). Ultimately, however, 
the success of quality improvement programs will be reflected in the beliefs that 
consumers have about the quality of products (Garvin, 1988). Since consumer behavior 
is driven by their perceptions of product quality rather than any objective measures such 
as e.g. conformity with engineering standards, there is a clear need for a more precise 
measure of perceived product quality. Thus, for the research project at hand, the project 
team follows the user-based perspective on product quality and accordingly defines
perceived product quality as the customer’s judgment of the overall excellence, esteem, 
or superiority of a product (with respect to its intended purposes) relative to the 
alternative products (Netemeyer et al. 2004).  

Multidimensionality of Quality Perceptions
Researchers have conceptualized both the quality of products and services as 
multidimensional constructs (Garvin 1984, Parasuraman et al. 1988). Unfortunately in
contrast to the rich literature on service quality, where instruments to measure service 
quality (e.g. SERVQUAL and, SERVPERF) have been extensively discussed and improved in the academic literature (Cronin Jr and Taylor 1992, Zeithaml et al. 2002), 
and have been widely applied in business practice and adapted to various contexts no 
comparable multi-dimensional metric exists for products. In the literature, agreement 
exists that perceived product quality needs to be conceptualized as a multidimensional 
construct (Brucks et al. 2000, Garvin 1988, Golder et al. 2012, Stone-Romero et al. 
1997). However, disagreement exists concerning the number and nature of the 
constituting dimensions of product quality. Table 1 shows the various quality dimensions 
proposed in the literature and their definitions.Research Approach
Due to the doubts and inconsistencies, concerning the role of constituting dimensions of 
perceived product quality in the literature a necessary first step in the present research 
project is to identify relevant product quality dimensions from a customer point of view.
Therefore in a first step qualitative interviews with customers were conducted. The 
sample consisted of 25 customers both in the USA and in India. Screening criteria for 
respondents were that they must have been using their smart phones for a minimum 
period of 6 months. Based on the outcomes of qualitative interviews an initial pool of 40
items to measure quality perceptions and potentially underlying dimensions were 
developed. In a first step, five practitioners from operations management and six 
practitioners from marketing, familiar with the quality topic, assessed this initial item pool 
for content validity and items individually for their comprehensibility. In a final survey 24
items to measure perceived product quality were retained. 
Overall 1000 smartphone customers in the US participated in a longitudinal survey
which collected data in two waves separated by six months ( data collected in 1st wave has a _1 suffix and data collected in 2nd wave has a _2 suffix in the variable names) : 
In both the surveys, the first part collected detailed information about the product (brand 
and exact model), usage frequency, purchase date and purchase price. The second 
part consisted of the refined item pool to measure customers product quality
perceptions. In this section, respondents were asked to evaluate their product on the 24
retained quality questions (in the next page) after the following introduction: “Please 
evaluate your smartphone in comparison with other smartphones in the same category 
by answering the questions below. Respondents rated their product on a 5-point scale. 
Depending on the questions three sets of scale labels were employed ranging from 1 
being “very poor”/”very short”/”very low” to 5 being “very good”/” very long”/”very high”. 
In the third part of the questionnaire, participants answered to a set of questions about 
themselves and their relationship with the product and its manufacturer. This part 
consisted of items from established scales for the following concepts: satisfaction, 
overall perceived quality, willingness to pay price premium, and repurchase intentions. 
The last part of the questionnaire was used to collect demographic information of the 
participants

qd_pf1 - the overall performance of my smartphone
qd_pf2 - how well does your smartphone perform its core functions?
qd_pf3 -the call quality offered by my smartphone is
qd_ft1 - the number of additional features my smartphone offers is
qd_ft2 -the innovativeness of the extra features offered by my smartphone is
qd_ft3 -the excitement I get from my smartphone’s extra features is
qd_as1 -the appeal of my smartphone ’s design is
qd_as2 -the overall attractiveness of my smartphone is
qd_as3 -the overall fit and finish of my smartphone is
qd_sr1 -the competence of my smartphone’s customer service staff is
qd_sr2 -the responsiveness of my smartphone’s customer service staff is
qd_sr3 -the promptness with which my smartphone’s customer service reacts to my issues is
qd_re1 -the severity of defects/glitches of my smartphone is
qd_re2 -my smartphone’s probability of failure or malfunctioning is
qd_re3 -the time span for which my smartphone runs/will run without any major defects is
qd_du1 durb - the life span of my smartphone is/will be
qd_du2 - the amount of time for which my smartphone works/will work perfectly even under 
heavy usage (ex. frequent gaming) is
qd_du3 -the amount of time for which my smartphone maintains/will maintain its full 
functionality even under harsh usage conditions (extreme cold/heat/rain) is
qd_eu1 - my experience to learn how to properly operate my smartphone with all its 
functionalities is/was
qd_eu2 - my user experience with the various functions my smartphone offers is/was
qd_eu3 - my smartphone's ease of use is
qd_mt1 - the exclusiveness of the materials used in my smartphone is
qd_mt2 - the endurance of the material used is
qd_mt3 - the robustness of the material used is


Tasks:
You and your team members in the Marketing Anaytics division are assigned the task of 
analyzing this longitudinal data from the survey outlined above. Your team is supposed 
to help company in understanding the customers’ view of product quality for 
smartphones and how these quality perceptions drive their customer behaviors like 
repurchase intentions and willingness to pay premium compared to customer 
satisfaction and other old quality matrix and ACSI index.
Using your knowledge of Python-programming your teams needs to do the 
following:
Since this is a longitudinal survey, you have a strong data to compare the crosssectional and longitudinal behaviors and suggest your company for a better quality 
improvement decisions. In cross sectional analysis you wil compare the 
independent variables from wave 1(and 2) with the dependent variables of wave 
1(and 2) whereas in longitudinal analysis you will compare the independent 
variables from wave 1 with the dependent variables of wave 2.
1. Start by analyzing and cleaning the data and getting the descriptives of all the 
data variables.
2. Create new variables for dependent variables: satisfaction (sat), willingness to 
pay(wtpp), repurchase intentions (ri) and word of mouth (wom), performance, 
feature. Etc.
These new variables are supposed to be means of the items in each of the 
survey i,e, SAT1 = mean( sat1_1, sat2_1, sat3_1) and so on.
3. Run a regression analysis with the quality dimensions and satisfaction as 
independent and the mean score of willingness to pay premium and repurchase 
intention as dependent variables. Interpret your results from a managerial 
perspective. You need to do a cross-sectional regression for both the waves and 
one longitudinal analysis for better understanding.
Do the results of the regression analysis for repurchase intentions differ 
across brands e.g. Samsung versus Apple. What do the results of these 
regressions imply? Please compare the brands on these regression coefficients. What are points of parity and points of difference for the Apple and 
Samsung. 
(for Wave 1 on Wave 1 data use R, and for Wave2 on Wave 2 data use 
Python)
4. Run a cross-sectional and longitudinal regression analysis with the quality 
dimensions of the old measure (q_old_XXX) and satisfaction as independent and 
the mean score of willingness to pay premium and repurchase intention as 
dependent variables. Interpret your results from a managerial perspective. Do 
the results of the regression analysis for repurchase intentions differ and 
give different perspectives compared to the multi-dimensional measure 
adopted in question 3? Please compare the brands again on these regression 
coefficients. What are points of parity and points of difference for the Apple and 
Samsung. 
5. Using ACSI measure as your independent variable and WTPP and RI as 
dependent variable for both the waves, conduct a linear regression.
Is ACSI alone giving you enough idea about the customer behavior?
6. Does the age of consumer plays any role in defining their quality perception?
For question 4,5 and 6, you can use either R or Python as per your choice.
Present your business report to the board of directors including the CFO about 
your research and if it makes sense to go for the new measure of product quality
and if it is really useful compared to the existing measure of customer behavior.
Use data visualization techniques from R and Python to create graphs wherever 
necessary and helps in ease of understanding.
A well documented and commented R/Python as annexure script file containing 
details of all the codes employed performing these tasks 
